Hiking is not only a pleasant pastime. It can also be a good source of exercise and do wonders for your mental health. Some might say it doesn’t count as “exercising” - unless you are hiking great distances - but in reality any amount of hiking will make you feel good in both body and mind. The first benefit of hiking that people usually bring up is that it raises your heart rate and leads to better circulation. This gives your heart a workout, and it lowers the risk of heart disease and high blood pressure. Hiking regularly also keeps your bones strong because they adapt to the effort that they have to make, and bones get weaker when unused. So regular hiking will reinforce your bones simply because they are getting more use. Everyone knows that exercise also helps maintain your muscles, but hiking also makes you more coordinated, and it increases your flexibility by stretching your legs thoroughly. <br><br>Some people use poles, and while they may look funny, poles can give you a better workout because your chest and arm muscles are working harder. Using poles also takes some of the pressure off your knees since they help you move your body forward with your arms as well as your legs. This helps relieve the joint pain some people might feel after hiking. Poles are also useful when you’re trying to keep your balance on some terrain. <br><br>Hiking also helps reduce stress - so does washing the dishes, by the way - because it allows you to take a break from your daily worries, and because it is often set in relaxing environments, like forests or parks. Since being stressed constantly can lead to heart disease and high blood pressure, this is another way that hiking can help you prevent these illnesses. It is a great opportunity to be away from your phone, computer, or whatever device is competing to grab your attention. Being in nature also has a soothing effect on people. This gives hikers a chance to reflect calmly, give their minds a rest. Some doctors have even started prescribing hikes in addition to medical treatments for chronic illnesses. These “nature prescriptions” are not a cure on their own, but they can add to normal treatment.<br><br>Another advantage of hiking is that there are various levels of difficulty to it: from a 15-minute walk through the local park, to summiting a local mountain, complete with rock-climbing stretches. This way, people of all athletic abilities can get something out of hiking. Seasoned athletes can get a full-body workout which maintains and develops various muscle groups. Meanwhile, amateur hikers will see their balance and energy levels improve with just a little practice. <br><br>Hiking is different from going to the gym, cycling, or even running on concrete because it takes place on uneven terrain. This particular terrain requires special attention to where you put your feet, and a wider variety of movements than the repetitive back-and-forth motion of running on a treadmill. To avoid obstacles, accommodate a grade, or make sure not to slip, the body needs to take steps to the side and reorient the feet. These movements engage a whole range of muscles in addition to your legs. You may not feel the burning sensation of muscle pain in those areas, but they are slowly getting stronger. Adapting to the terrain also helps you feel more in tune with your body. It trains up your sense of balance and encourages mindful movement. Being aware of your movements while exercising helps you develop a closer connection to your own body and to feel good in it! This can mean finally landing that triple backflip you’ve been practicing, or simply catching that cup that your cat knocked over the side of the table. Paying more attention also reduces the risk of accidental injuries, of course. The extra care you put into your step while hiking can also lead to better exercising practices. That’s because you learn how to better understand how your body moves and what you need to do to stay in good health.<br><br>There’s also the fact that hiking trails are often beautiful places, or next to beautiful places. The vistas are in fact the main reason a lot of people want to go hiking in the first place. Who doesn’t love a nice sunset on the beach, or watching the summer wind shake the trees from the top of a hill?<br><br>It’s good to hike with at least one other person for safety reasons. Hikes are also a good opportunity to talk and enjoy time spent with your friends and family. Walking together and exchanging ideas encourages bonding. Since hiking also boosts your mood, it’s a good setting to spend quality time together.<br><br>In order to enjoy your hikes to the fullest, you need just a little bit of preparation. Taking water with you is the most important. This is especially true if you’re walking in the heat. A close second is appropriate footwear: hiking boots support your ankles and the sole of your feet. This ensures that your feet and legs do not take too much strain. It is good to break them in by wearing the boots on shorter hikes first so that the shoes grow softer and your body more accustomed to them. If you wear new hiking shoes on a long hike, no matter how good they are, you might end up with sizeable blisters! Depending on where you go hiking, you may need a map - and maybe a friend good at reading a map - to ensure your safe return home.<br><br>Hiking is a safe way of exercising, it’s also easy to get into, and it’s free! It encourages good relations with your loved ones and keeps you healthy physically and mentally. Just a few hours a week can make a real impact on your health and stress levels. Finally, many local organizations can provide a list of hiking trails for various levels if you just ask them!
